For lots of people who experience abuse and trauma
— from religious to occupational to domestic —
a common symptom they wrestle with is rumination:
perpetually dwelling on their experience.
This symptom can last for weeks, months, sometimes years.
I want to explore this psychological trap
and look at various ways of extracting ourselves from it.
In broad terms, rumination is defined
as the process of thinking deeply about something
or the product of that thought.
And in ordinary circumstances, there’s no
harm in this kind of immersive reflection.
We use it to acclimatise to new information
and situations
for example in bereavement, where thinking
intensely and repeatedly
about what we’ve lost allows us to adjust
to the new reality.
We use rumination to make complicated plans
and solve problems.
It can help us overcome the errors we often
fall into
when we rely on more simplistic emotionally
driven reflex thinking.
The biases, the prejudices, the habitual mental
shortcuts we take
that cloud and distort complex realities.
In its positive form, rumination can lead
to insight and progress.
It’s the morbid form that leads to problems
when we find ourselves circling endlessly
and unproductively
around negative thoughts, images,
mistakes, encounters.
Like a deeply scratched vinyl record we skip
back to the same position,
looping round the same groove, never moving forward.
Frida constantly replays memories of an abusive
relationship.
She recalls various scenes from the relationship
and imagines herself responding differently
shouting back angrily and standing her ground.
Whole afternoons, evenings, nights can be
swallowed up
internally rehearsing a single incident that
lasts barely a minute
and that Frida’s revisited countless times before.
Roger frequently experiences nightmarish thoughts
of a magical realm of eternal torture that
he was told existed after death.
As a child, he was fed vivid fantasies
about the terrible punishments awaiting people there
like being starved and taunted with food they
couldn’t reach
or being made to jump off high cliffs
then having their smashed bodies restored
just so they could jump again.
Forever.
Roger was told that he was born with a sick nature and deserved this torture
and that his only hope of escaping it was
to beg forgiveness
for his imperfect thoughts and imperfect actions.
Only after his death would he learn if he’d
done enough grovelling.
Since childhood, Roger’s struggled to meet
the paralysing expectations imposed on him
brooding incessantly on his shortcomings
obsessing over possible negative consequences
to his actions
fearing the forbidden thoughts that could
flash uninvited into consciousness at any moment.
Joni lives far away from her abusive father.
That distance and her hectic work life
have given her a plausible excuse
to minimise contact.
She only sees him at large family events where
she can avoid being alone with him.
The one form of contact she still struggles with
are the letters they continue to send each other.
Seeing one of his arrive, her body will flood
with adrenaline.
She’ll open it with shaking hands.
Reading it, the world will disappear.
Nothing else will exist but his words
which will seesaw between pathos
and unbridled persecution
one moment piling on frailty and vulnerability
with a trowel
the next firing savage accusations at Joni,
scapegoating her for his problems.
The letter will preoccupy her for days.
These ruminations leave Joni, Frida and Roger
feeling churned up
disconnected from their lives and stuck firmly
in the past.
The irony is that for all three of them
rumination began as a coping strategy.
For many people, rumination seems to offer
some kind of comfort at first.
For Roger, who would experience huge spikes
of panic and anxiety
in response to some perceived shortcoming
rumination would initially have a dampening
effect on his emotions.
As punishing as it felt, dwelling on thoughts
of worthlessness
gave him a degree of psychological shelter
from the sharper feelings.
But eventually, raw from his compulsive mental
self-flagellation
he would trade anxiety for depression.
For Frida, who’d felt like a powerless doormat
in her past relationship
reimagining herself as the angry victor made
her feel powerful for a while.
The anger was intoxicating — and addictive.
And she would rehearse her fantasies over
and over to sustain the high.
As she became aware of the hours slipping by
She’d start promising herself the next repetition
would be the last.
And she would repeatedly break that promise.
Unable to stop herself, she would gradually succumb
to feelings of intense powerlessness.
For Joni, who would feel immobilised by her
father’s letters
rumination would initially offer her
an illusion of hope
that maybe this time she’d think
of a game-changing response
that would set them on a different track.
But for every idea that came to mind
she’d see how he could twist it against her.
She knew how a single innocent word could
be loaded with false poison.
Slowly, exhausted from futile overthinking,
she would sink into despair.
Many abused and traumatised individuals
intuitively believe
rumination is somehow helping them cope.
But the evidence points in the opposite direction.
Rumination is often the gateway
to much bigger problems.
A substantial body of research suggests that
far from doing any good,
rumination plays a significant role
in both the onset and the maintenance of various
mood-related problems
involving anxiety, stress, compulsions
and depression.
Studies have highlighted some of the specific
features of rumination
that pull us down these pathological paths.
Investigating the role of rumination in post
traumatic stress disorder
Tanya Michael and colleagues note that patients
often focus
on open-ended unresolvable ‘why’ and ‘what
if’ types of questions
instead of the actual traumatic experience.
Edward Watkins and colleagues have reported
similar findings
in the areas of anxiety, depression
and impulsive behaviours.
They found a significant determining factor
in the experience of these problems
was whether the individual engaged in concrete
or abstract rumination.
Concrete rumination involves gathering clear
discernible details
observable facts, quantifiable evidence.
We confine ourselves to what actually happened.
With abstract rumination, we drift away from facts
and start contemplating questions that have
no definitive answers.
We become preoccupied with possibilities
possible meanings, possible motives,
possible consequences.
The possibilities are endless. And debilitating.
Concrete rumination addresses the specific
context of a situation.
If we fail a task, we try to identify the
specific factors that led to that particular failure.
By doing that, we get the chance to learn
from it and move on.
Abstract rumination works
in the opposite direction
removing context and distorting information
into broad generalisations.
If we fail a task, we generalise it
into a personality trait.
We become a failure.
We can’t do anything right.
We might also apply generalisations
to other people.
If friends are unable to fit in with our plans
perhaps because they’re dealing with their
own personal demands or struggles
we dismiss that context and label them selfish
and uncaring.
Abstract rumination globalises our negative
experiences.
We convince ourselves that something that
happened once
will always be the case
—and has always been the case.
These distortions prevent us from learning
and leave us with a sense of hopelessness.
Unlike the more systematic focus
seen in concrete rumination
with abstract rumination, there’s often
a haphazard butterfly focus.
Individuals hop around from thought to thought
from memory to memory, in a disorganised way
never stopping long enough
to see anything through to the point of resolution.
Because of this vague processing
past experiences of significantly different natures
get blurred together into false patterns.
Eventually individuals become overloaded with
unresolved thoughts and feelings.
Abstract rumination magnifies and prolongs
negative states.
Like a black hole, it consumes vast amounts
of energy and offers no light.
Just an expanding sense of darkness.
To combat abstract rumination
we need to put our thoughts in their proper place.
Even when we’re not ruminating
we often give our thoughts quite staggering
power and control over us.
As children, we’re often taught to view
our thoughts
as reflections of who we are.
We learn to equate our thoughts with our identity.
Even the most random notions
that pop into our heads
feel like a comment on our deepest self.
If uncharitable thoughts cross our minds,
it means we’re wicked.
Even if we never act on them.
Some religious groups
push this misconception further
with the concept of thought crime.
Merely thinking about doing something becomes
the same as doing it.
Oddly this only seems to apply to bad thoughts.
There’s no positive equivalent of thought
heroism for good thoughts.
Fantasising about giving
vast amounts of money to charity
isn’t considered the same as doing it.
Equating thoughts with actions gives them
a completely fraudulent power status.
The concept of magical wishes elevates that
status further.
Now our thoughts make things happen.
Magical wishes are a source of false hope
and often great anguish.
Sometimes in a moment of anger we might wish
for something bad.
When our anger passes, instead of viewing
our wish
as a momentary expression of mental frustration
we worry it’s had some physical effect
on the universe.
In these and other ways, we let our thoughts
push us all out of shape.
Breaking the powerful emotional hold our thoughts
have over us
means changing our relationship to thinking.
The concept of ‘distancing’ refers to
the exercise
of standing back from our thoughts
and viewing them from a detached perspective.
John Powers and Kevin Labar noted various
kinds of distancing.
They used the example of feeling hurt
by a criticism from a co-worker.
We could use objective distancing
imagining how the criticism might be viewed
by a neutral third party.
Temporal distancing involves imagining the
criticism happened years ago.
With hypothetical distancing,
we’d imagine the incident
was a theoretical situation instead of a real one.
Distancing removes us from the emotional impulses
of the moment
that can distort and block our processing
and allows us to consider different responses.
As we exercise more detachment from our thoughts
we can exercise more choice over which thoughts
we engage with.
When thoughts pop into our heads
we often automatically give them
our immediate attention.
If people turned up at our house uninvited
we wouldn’t automatically let them in.
We’d ask ourselves: Is it a convenient time for us?
What are these people here for?
Is it pleasure, business, some emergency?
We’d decide whether or not we wanted
to invite them in.
Thoughts are like guests
in the houses of our minds.
We can choose which ones we open our doors to
and which ones we decline to entertain.
Just like human visitors who refuse to take
no for an answer
we might find that some negative thoughts persist
in trying to push their way in
and get our attention.
In tackling them, it’s important to recognise
the difference
between resisting them and dismissing them.
There might be a natural temptation to try
and expel persistent thoughts
from our minds by force
to try and lock them out with sheer willpower.
When we do this, we create an internal conflict
that sets us up for failure and frustration.
If someone says, ‘Don’t think of a chair’
what are you most likely to think of?
When we try not to think of something
we’re asking some part of our brain
to keep track of the thing
that we don’t want to keep track of.
It’s like handcuffing ourselves to something
then trying to run away from it.
The more defences we put up,
the more frustrated we get
when the thought continues
to break through them
the more power we give the thought over us.
We drift into a fearful position,
dreading its return.
In contrast, when we dismiss a thought
instead of trying to block it out by force
we accept that the thought exists
and simply choose not to give it any energy.
Some people find it’s useful at the start
to speak directly to the thought
to say something like:
‘I acknowledge your existence.
But I have no use for you.’
Or ‘I know you’d like some of my time.
But not today.’
Because we’re not working against ourselves
we preserve internal harmony.
Because the persistent thought no longer arouses
anxiety or frustration, it loses power.
And we maintain an emotionally neutral position.
Eventually, starved of attention,
the uninvited thought will fade away.
And we won’t even notice.
Recognising that we can choose which thoughts
we give our attention to
means we always have the option
to simply disengage
from any persistent negative thought at any time
and stop rumination in its tracks.
Building on that, I want to look at some ways
we can help to permanently uproot
negative thoughts
and restore the balance that rumination disrupted.
In some cases of rumination, our thoughts
don’t correspond to any real problem.
We’re wrestling with an illusion.
We can end this kind of rumination permanently
by debunking the hollow idea or belief
that’s kept us stuck.
This involves cultivating our inner lawyer
and shifting from abstract to concrete processing.
Roger was tormented by the possibility
of a magical realm of eternal torment.
His indoctrinators had injected him
with an unanswerable question,
a torturous ‘what if’.
When zealots ply us
with horrifying magical ‘what ifs’
we need to be very clear
about what they’re doing.
They’re trying to plant an anxiety inside
us that we can’t resolve.
When we start down the path of what ifs
there’s no end to the available horror.
Whatever nightmare possibility we imagine
we can always imagine something worse.
We can always add more horror.
The fear we feel contemplating those what ifs
isn’t a response to any real danger.
It’s a response to our own imagination.
Roger’s recovery from rumination began
when he reined in his imagination
and shifted his focus
to discernable details and identifiable facts;
when he changed the ‘what if’ into a ‘what is’.
The fact was his indoctrinators had never offered
any persuasive evidence
for a single one of their claims.
They’d simply subjected him to magical fearmongering
let his mind run wild, and in his terror
he’d surrendered his rationality.
Now, with rationality restored,
Roger’s inner lawyer
dismissed their case on the grounds
of total lack of evidence.
While Roger’s rumination was ultimately
based on an illusion
for many others, the focus of their rumination
is very tangible.
Like Joni’s father.
Sometimes we get stuck ruminating on a problem
because we keep using the same fixed approach.
We need to reframe the picture
—view it from another angle.
As noted before, with abstract rumination
we’re often viewing situations
through a distorting lens of broad generalisations
when we need to be looking at specific contexts.
In Joni’s case, she assumed everyone was
fundamentally amenable to reason.
And as long as she continued to view her father
from that fixed angle
she continued to exhaust herself
trying to reason with him.
Her rumination ended when she allowed herself
to view him from a different angle
as someone who wasn’t open to reason.
From there, everything fell into place.
Abusers come in a variety of forms.
Some act like five-year-olds
often because in some important
developmental terms
that’s what they are: children.
Some abusers are like histrionic actors
generating endless melodramas and casting
themselves in the starring role
often as some noble unappreciated victim.
Joni realised this was what her father was doing.
He had no interest in listening to reason.
He was focused purely on hunting for grievances
to create his dramas.
When Joni recognised this, she stopped taking
his letters seriously.
Whenever they arrived, she would read them aloud
in the style they were written
— like a Shakespearian tragedy.
Instead of a source of stress, they became
a source of entertainment.
She continued to write back occasionally.
But kept her replies brief and wasted
no unnecessary thought on them.
When we get stuck in one perspective
seeing things from another angle
can be a transformative experience.
Another way to step out of rumination
is to give our thoughts and feelings some
external expression.
Many writers say they can never discuss a
project with anyone until it’s completed.
Talking about it before it’s done takes
away the drive to see the project through.
They no longer feel the need to tell the story
because by sharing it with someone it feels
like it’s already been told.
In the same way, the drive to ruminate often subsides
when we find some way to get our thoughts
out of our heads
where they just go in circles
and give them some external expression.
There are many ways to do this.
Keeping journals.
Using some creative medium
likepainting or music.
Some people use what’s called the ‘empty
chair’ technique—
they imagine the person they’re ruminating about
sitting in front of them in an empty chair
and say whatever they need to say.
For some targets of abuse,
writing letters to their abusers
really purges their minds
of a lot of pent-up material.
For people who do choose to write letters,
a word of caution.
Don’t ever send them.
It’s not about engaging with the abuser.
It’s just about releasing our thoughts.
Some people burn or shred their letters.
Some post them back to themselves.
Whatever works for you.
It’s worth saying something here
about expressing anger.
Anger is an important and valuable emotion.
It can give us strength and motivation
to combat real abuse.
And sometimes we can lose ourselves in it.
Frida’s angry reinventions of past scenes
with her abuser made her feel strong
but kept her from moving forward.
Her anger made it easy for her
to see all her problems as someone else’s fault.
It also prevented her from recognising
and processing
the softer feelings that her anger was covering
feelings of hurt and vulnerability.
It was when Frida was finally able to express
her full range of feelings
that she began to free herself from the past.
Activity can be a great preventative measure
against rumination.
Not necessarily in the way
we might intuitively think.
Some people use activity
as a distraction technique.
But this doesn’t always help.
Because we’re using activity
as a kind of resistance
—an attempt to push thoughts away —
it can end up arousing more anxiety.
Activity helps to restore balance to our lives.
Rumination can lead to prolonged
periods of inactivity.
Preoccupied in our thoughts,
we put off social engagements;
we fail to plan recharging breaks;
we neglect ourselves.
We stop doing the things that might help
to lift us out of our mood.
As days of inactivity begin to mount up
our rumination becomes self-feeding.
All we have to look back on are days
of unproductive thought.
Activity helps to break up
that self-reinforcing pattern.
It gives our days distinctive texture and
stimulates our thinking in other areas.
Again, a word of caution.
When we’re starting to re-engage with activities
after long periods of rumination
it’s easy to fall into self-defeating
internal dialogues.
We might think to ourselves:
‘This used to be more fun.’
‘Why am I not enjoying this
as much as I used to?’
Instead of making negative comparisons
with the past
just focus on what the activity’s
giving you right now.
Which brings me, finally, to mindfulness —
a state of focus on the present moment.
Mindfulness is about becoming aware
of the here and now
observing our thoughts and our sensory experience
in a state of detached curiosity.
Instead of becoming entangled and defined
by our thoughts and emotions
we watch them come and go without attachment.
We view them as the fleeting
experiences they are.
If we find ourselves going off into the past
or the future
we just notice that that’s happened and
bring ourselves back to the present.
If we become aware of any critical inner voices
telling us we’re doing a bad job of this
mindfulness stuff
again, we notice it without engaging with it.
Through mindfulness, we can learn to direct
our attention
purposefully and calmly
instead of allowing ourselves
to be yanked around passively by random butterfly
thoughts and feelings.
Research has shown that regular
mindfulness exercises
can have a hugely positive impact on rumination
and mood disorders.
Of course there’ll be times in all of our lives
when we have to face painful
thoughts and feelings.
Times of conflict and abuse.
Times of loss and bereavement.
And allowing ourselves to feel
the pain of those moments
is an important part of processing them.
But if we find ourselves descending into downward
spirals of morbid unproductive thought
there are measures we can take
—dos and don’ts —
to halt and reverse that descent.
And overcome rumination.